Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, Ricardo Lopez, and today I'm
joined by Doctor Christopher Hoyt. He's an associate professor
in the Department of Philosophy and religion at Western
Carolina University. His research interests include Wittgenstein and the
philosophy of film, and today we're going to talk
about uh some of the philosophy of Ludwig Wittgenstein,
uh, how it relates to some Uh, topics that
people explore in the philosophy of mind and also
the cognitive science of religion. So Doctor Hoyt, welcome
to the show. It's a pleasure to have you
on.
Thank you very much, Ricardo. I, I appreciate the
invitation.
So, uh, I mean, of course, this is also
a question for my audience who doesn't know about
Wittgenstein very much or are not uh familiar with
his philosophy. Uh, WHAT aspects of Wittgenstein's philosophy interest
you the most? And perhaps then we can talk
about the ones that apply to the topics we're
going to explore here today.
Sure, um, I mean, like most people who study
Wittgenstein as long and intensively as I have, my
interests move around through so many different themes that
he covers. Um, I can say that, you know,
most recently in the last few years. There are
probably 3 big themes that that interest me. I
mean, the philosophy of mind and what it really
means for psychology and for understanding people is on
my mind all the time. Um, HE'S there there's
sort of a message there about How it's so
difficult to understand ourselves and others that I find
really fascinating, and how that difficulty is then confused
in psychology and philosophy of mind. People go about
it incorrectly and so we end up with these
false kinds of answers. So that's led to my
my recent essentially returned interest in. The applications of
Wittgenstein to psychology, academic psychology, um, neuroscience have been
thinking more about what how Wittgenstein's work might relate
to the study of autism. Um, AND so I
find that right now I'm working on problems like
that. Um, THERE are a couple other themes that
are that are really on my mind. Partly because
of my teaching, um, teaching a class on film,
and then right now I'm doing an upper level
seminar with undergraduate students on Wittgenstein. And so that
that forces me to try to really boil things
down to what they can absorb. So a second
theme in Wikenstein that I'm really thinking about a
lot lately is. The implications of what he's saying
about meaning, the, the fact that Possibly the most
essential lesson from Wittgenstein is that meanings don't stand
apart from things. The, the meaning of a word
is not separate from the word. The meaning is
the use. The meaning of a gesture is not
something separate from the gesture. The meaning of the
things that are happening in film are not separate
from what we're seeing in the films themselves, and
That's, that's a very useful useful point in understanding
our everyday lives. Um, IT'S hard to get it,
I think. It's relatively easy to say it, but
it takes people time to really absorb what's going
on. And then I would say that the last
thing that's on my mind quite a bit, it's
come and gone and my thinking isstein's relatively casual
remarks about how he thinks his philosophy stands outside
of our current cultural trends, the trends that he
was living through in the early 20th century, but
that I think only accelerated since then. So that,
that would be the the trends of trying to
see meaning as something hidden. In systems that can
be analyzed through logic and philosophy and how that
really gets in the way of understanding things and
I've been thinking about that as part of academic
culture that it's I think it's sometimes hard to
publish the things or talk about the things that
are most helpful, and people get caught up talking
about imaginary hidden systems. So, those are 3 things
that are really on my mind.
But by the way, since later on in our
conversation, we're going to get a little bit into
the cognitive science of religion, and just for the
audience to, I mean, understand a little bit better.
Uh, HOW you would place Wittgenstein as, uh, an
intellectual here. Because we tend to think of him,
uh, I guess, more as, uh, more as of
a, a philosopher. But, uh, of course, he was
very multidisciplinary in a way. I mean, He worked
on logics, mathematics, and then I guess that we
can also say symbiotics in a sense, and then
linguistics, but then he also theorized about psychological phenomena,
etc. So, would you classify him as, I don't
know, a philosopher or what kind of intellectual, really?
I, I would say he's quite strictly a philosopher.
Uh, HIS, I, I think there's other things that
you mentioned, all those different areas to different degrees.
He's, he has things to say they're important in
those fields, and that's true in psychology, but they're
true philosophically. So he was a philosopher whose work
has real practical import, but he wasn't theorizing in
those domains. He wasn't doing research in those areas.
He was essentially commenting on the conceptual framework within
which people operate in those areas and saying, in
many cases there's some really deep mistakes. That are
in the way of gaining real understanding, and I
think that's true. Everything that he has to say
about psychology, I think that that's where how to
understand him is essentially as a critic. There are
positive lessons, but they're not the kinds that you
get within those fields.
Mhm. I, I guess it's important to really drive
this point home, I guess, because, of course, when
we're talking about something like the cognitive science of
religion. It's not that, uh, what comes from philosophers
just because they are not scientists doesn't matter, but
the inputs we usually get from scientists and philosophers
tend to be a little bit different.
Right. Yes, I think that's right. And, and, you
know, the comment I made at the beginning about
meaning tells you a lot, which is about culture
and meaning, um. I mean, one of Wittgenstein's great
worries was that we were becoming a civilization that
thinks of science and causal explanation as the only
forms of explanation, and he was driven to remind
us that there are many ways of understanding the
world, and they're legitimate ways. They're not poetic, pretty,
they're they're truly meaningful. They, they lead to real
understanding. And he, he talks about them as in
culture and value there's a remark where he says
we need to, something along the lines if we
need to resurrect those other modes of understanding the
neglected modes of understanding and and that's true in
psychology. So that he's not competing with psychologists, he's
really trying to Lay the groundwork for understanding each
other well.
Mhm. And this is also very, I mean, these
are very important insights, the ones we're going to
talk about because also some of them inform actual
scientific work and scientific research that people conduct in
the cognitive science and of religion and, and elsewhere,
right?
They should. I don't, I don't see having uh
the impacts on science that I think he deserves
to have. But, um, he, he could.
Yeah. I, I, I mean, I was also, uh,
of course, not only about Wittgenstein, but I was
also making a broader, uh, commentary on how many
times insights from philosophers do that.
Oh yes, and, and from within the fields too,
I mean, when people are constructing new theories and
they they get into the, the competition between schools
of of psychology and Uh, yeah, then they're doing
philosophy themselves, and they often incorporate the ideas of
philosophers, absolutely.
And so talking about philosophy of mind, in what
ways would you say Wittgenstein's philosophy connect to wit
and what are perhaps some of the most relevant
insights coming from him that you would say apply
not only to philosophy of mind, but also to
religion more specifically or to the phenomenon of religion
more specifically?
OK, well, let's let's start with philosophy of mind
and psychology. Um, I mean the There's a a
a core insight there that It is definitely the
place to start, which is that the mind is
not an interior realm. The very idea that minds
are things inside of people, is that is the
the false picture that Wittgenstein works so hard to
liberate us from. And One of the great ironies
is that, you know, within psychology, psychologists always say,
well, I'm a hardcore materialist, and yet they end
up describing people and their work as though they
were working out the system where the private mind.
Constructed a theory or an image, some kind of
representation of all of the external world. As soon
as you have that duality of of mind and
world, you've made the big mistake that the constraint
is trying to liberate us from. And It's incredibly
difficult not to think about human beings that way,
and I, and I would say in my experience
personally with people, it's really only people that have
worked with Beckenstein for years that seem to have
worked their way out of that in a genuine
way. And um, so that has everything to do
with psychology because you know, uh so much psychology
it concerns theories of how the inner mechanism works,
how it's building images, representations of the external world,
and if you're if you're doing that, you are
making the big mistake that I would say. I
shouldn't exaggerate. Wittstein is is all over the place
with many things, but that is a very big
part of Wittgenstein's later philosophy. It's a really big
part. Um, SO that's on the critical side, that
would be what not to do. If, if there's
a positive lesson it has to do with if
you stop imagining that people are made up of
this inner and outer realm. Then you really have
to rethink what are we talking about when we're
we're talking about people. What is psychological language actually
doing and what is the work of understanding each
other and A lot of what he's saying, this
is a lot of what I've been trying to
find ways to express recently, is that human life
is really, really complex, and our psychological concepts deal
with especially complex dimensions of life. And so understanding
ourselves and understanding each other means looking at those
aspects of life and all of their complexity, and
If, if you take that perspective correctly, there, there
are corners to bring science in that are extremely
useful, but it's no longer the grand project of
describing how the private mind constructs a theory of
the external world, that disappears as fantasy.
So there's an element of uh embeddedness there, right?
I mean, the human mind being embedded in a
larger, uh, I don't know, uh context. I, I'm
not sure if in this particular case, it would
be a, a social context, but uh at least
a broader context outside of the, uh, I, I
mean, the skull, let's say, right?
It's, you have to be careful with that kind
of talk, um. It's not that that that's correct
in a way, but, but that you, it's still
a way of talking that some people would think
of it as minds are things and Wienstein is,
is trying to get us to, to understand that
our mental concepts are not talking about things at
all. They're dealing with complex. Domains of life or
aspects of life that To say the mind is
embedded leads might lead someone to think we're talking
about a thing that has a a particular context,
so it's really an aspect of life. OK.
And in what ways would that apply then to
religious phenomenon or religion itself?
Well, um, I mean, starting off generally, the philosophy
of religion. WAS for a long time, probably still
is dominated by discussions of The theories of the
world. So there, there's an idea, it's very common
in popular thought, as well as academic research, to
imagine that a religion is a theory of the
world, and it has to compete against science and
and a secular theory of the world. We're back
to that picture. The very picture that there's a
private mind that constructs a theory of the external
world, and religions are these theories of the external
world. Um. When we really abandon that as Fikenstein
wants us to do. Then what's left is looking
at people and how they live and the, the
lessons that come out of Wienstein's remarks in my
view, um, about religion come down to the idea
that It is remarkable that people can live in
so many different ways. Um, DC Phillips has a,
a lovely expression where it talks about ways of
being human and That really captures something deep in
what Wittgenstein was trying to say about religions that
these are These are deeply important complex ways of
being human, and to understand them has nothing to
do with understanding a theory of the world. It's
the work is mostly about, there are there are
a lot of things that can help us understand
other people's religions, but it's trying to imagine your
way into the life of another person. And the
ways that things become meaningful in the context of
that life, the rituals, the act of prayer, the
sentences someone speaks, they take on meaning from a
particular way of life or forms of life, to
use Wittgenstein's expression. And very different orientation.
Mhm. And since you mentioned rituals there, uh, I
mean, I guess that there would be two sides
to this question. So, um, first of all, what
does meaning mean to Wittgenstein and then what makes
rituals meaningful then?
Yeah, those, those are good hard questions, um. Things,
words, rituals, gestures are meaningful to humans simply because
they're they're used in ways that are important to
us. The the meaning is the use, Bechtenstein says,
and One of the things about being the kind
of creature that that we are, that that you
are being a human being, a homo sapien. Is
that We have the capacity to acquire this, this
repertoire of behaviors that is speech, or a repertoire
of behaviors that is a religious pattern of ritual.
We have the capacity to evolve a way of
of being in the world, to develop a life
where praying seems natural and important to us. And
that's what it is to have meaning is to
live a life where those things are important, and
the meaning is not separate from the things at
all. It's not shown by those things or defined
by those things or proved by those things that
that's all that is the whole story of meaning
that They're valuable in human life. Um, YEAH. And
did you want to ask a follow-up question?
Uh, NO, I, I mean, did you have anything
to add there or otherwise I would ask you
another question.
Uh, SURE, well, I, I mean, in, in understanding
rituals, there, there is some, I should acknowledge that
Dickenstein scholars are not all in agreement about this.
So Dickens made a couple of remarks that Have
led people to take seriously this idea they had
an expressivist theory of ritual that rituals are a
way of expressing certain things that a person is
thinking or feeling. I think that is. Uh, A
red herring. He doesn't. In this and every other
case, Wittgenstein doesn't have theories, and I think that
that's really important. I think that what's really important
is Wittgenstein is trying to get us in touch
with all of the possible ways that rituals can
be meaningful, all of the ways that they can
be woven into human lives in a way that
they become important. And I think that that is
the right perspective to take and trying to make
sense of Vigentra on ritual.
OK. And I mean, as far as I've read
in your work about his takes on rituals, it
seems that many times uh they get easily misinterpreted
and related to that. There's this scapegoat remark. Uh,
COULD you tell us about it? I mean, what
is the scapegoat remark and what relationship does it
have or might have with his takes on rituals
being easily misinterpreted?
Sure. OK, so the, the scapegoat remark, um, Vienstein
made it several times in his manuscripts, and, um,
he, he There's a way of reading it. It
says uh of the, the ancient Jewish ritual of
a scapegoat. So ritual asked people to cast their
sins onto a goat and to send the goat
out into the desert to die, and There's a
way of looking at the remark um that that
people took where Wittgenstein seems to be saying that
the ritual itself is incoherent. And that was important
to scholars of Wittgenstein and scholars of religion, because
there were people there were Wittgenstein scholars essentially defending
their reading of Wittgenstein, saying that it proved that
Wittgenstein could see that religious rituals could be criticized
or religious beliefs could be criticized. So that there
was A reading, there was a complaint about Wittgenstein
and Wittgensteinians in philosophy of religion, saying, They're telling
us no religious beliefs can be criticized, no rituals
can be criticized. There's everything here is just we
have to take it at face value. And so
there's some Fitgensteinians, uh, starting with DC Phillips said,
no, no, Fitgenstein does admit that we can sometimes
criticize religions, look at what he says about the
scapegoat for month. Uh, NO, I think, I think
what Vickenstein was saying in that scapegoat remark was
that the ritual was easily misunderstood. So it's misunderstood
the same way that language, especially psychological language, is
so easily misunderstood. It leads to philosophical errors. And
so the the debate there I think got off
track, um, and I was that remark that I
wrote was mainly of interest to academics and Philosophers
of Wittgenstein, but I do think there's an important
lesson here that It's a red herring to worry
that Wittgenstein's philosophy is a philosophy of religion is
a type of fideism. He. He's not, he's not
saying that. All beliefs, all religious beliefs are necessarily
meaningful, it's The point is that whether or not
a belief or a ritual, a word, a gesture
is meaningful, depends on how it's woven into a
life. If it's woven into a life in a
way that it becomes substantial, significant in that life,
then we want to acknowledge that it's meaningful, that
is the meaning, and there's not much more to
say about it. And so much of the debate
about whether Wittgenstein was or wasn't the fides has
to do with again that same old picture. Is
he saying that any theory of the world is
an equally valid theory of the world, and he
wasn't worried, he was trying to get us away
from that picture of theories of the world. So
I, I feel that that discussion sort of took
Wittgenstein's scholarship someone off track. Mhm.
And sort of related to the work he did
on language. There are many scholars that take him
to work with language games with belief systems, and
then when applied to religion, a certain That these
belief systems are really about logical schemes founded on
their own basic beliefs and principles of inference. Uh,
WHAT do you think about this from a Wittgensteinian
perspective?
Uh, CLOSELY related with what I was just saying.
Yeah. The It's a, it's a difficult topic, but
it essentially. My understanding of Wittgenstein is that Belief
systems, to the extent that they exist, there there
are ways that exist in our lives. We can
talk about the systems of belief that frame a
culture, a community, possibly an individual life, but they're
not theories that are in the head. And once
you get away from that idea that we're talking
about a theory inside the private mind about the
external world, the whole way of understanding what a
belief system is shifts dramatically. The same way that
that what we're talking about when we're doing psychology
and talking about other people's thoughts and beliefs and
feelings, hope and despair, all the meaning of all
of those things shifts dramatically when we get rid
of that in or outer picture. And I think
that that's also true for belief systems and And
uh I'm not sure that That the victims and
scholars as a community have done enough to to
absorb what happens to belief systems if they're not
things inside the private mind. Um, I think there's
still work to be done there. Mhm.
And how does Wittgenstein in your view, understand, understand
religious?
Dogma. Uh, YEAH, I've got that just that one
essay that I wrote about, about dogma, um. I
think I'll, I'll talk about the, the critical and
the and the positive. Um, AGAIN, it's sort of
we're on a theme here, um, the, the critical
side is that when Philosophers of religion or even
laymen thinking about religions, think about dogmas in religion,
they do tend to think about belief systems. And
if we get rid of that, and we're not
worried about a private mental construct of the world,
we're worried about how people live. Then what's interesting
about religious dogma and what I think Wickenste is
really driving at is that this is a way
of being human, so to speak. It's It's a
pretty fascinating fact that people can, you know, a
Catholic can accept certain dogmas from the church authorities
and commit himself to living by those dogmas. And
have to resist his or her own possible Doubts
about those dogmas say, and, and you, you're forced
in a sense to work those into your life
and that's an interesting thing and the significance of
that in a life and what we want to
say about someone's spirituality is well worth tracing, but
At that point we're doing a kind of Anthropology
of how people live with dogmas. And it's descriptive,
this is a trend in Wittgenstein's thought generally, where
we thought we needed theory, we really end up
with a kind of something we might talk about
as a descriptive anthropology, and I think that's true
about religious dogma. It's an interesting thing that people
can do this.
So to get into the cognitive science of religion,
uh, I've actually already had several cognitive scientists of
religion on the show, and they come from, uh,
a, a, a non-Wittgensteinian perspective, let's call it like
that. So it's, uh, it would be very interesting.
So to have your uh Wittgensteinian perspective on it.
So uh before we get into a very specific
uh question topic that people explore there, what do
you think Wittgenstein would have made of the cognitive
science of religion as it is today?
OK, right here, I, I'm gonna choose to just
be blunt. Um, I think he would have hated
almost all of it. Um, THERE'S, there is room
to do legitimate science of religion. Whether it could
be done in in a way that would fit
the label of cognitive science or religion as it's
being done now, I'm skeptical of, although. We could
get there in details, but the cognitive science of
religion that I've read, um, and I, you know,
I'm not that widely read, but all of the
things that I have read, they are exactly doing
theories of how the inner mental mechanism constructs a
theory of the external world, and then they try
to talk about how There are particular mechanisms that
construct religious beliefs about the external world, so it's
the private mind external world problem yet again. And
because that picture is the central picture that Wittgenstein
is trying to liberate us from in his later
philosophy. He's really at odds with the project of
cognitive science of religion as as I've encountered it,
and I, I think it can be reasonably well
defined. Um, So yeah, they're they're really at odds
with each other, I'm afraid.
And one particular aspect of uh contemporary cognitive sense
of religion has to do with it, uh, being
based a lot on evolutionary approaches to the human
mind. Do you think that Wittgenstein would have problems
with that aspect specifically?
Well, this is a really important complex topic here.
So this, this is where I think psychology, maybe
not cognitive science, but psychology could be aligned with
Wittgenstein in a way to be profoundly informative and
and really interesting. He, there there is in this
philosophy a very clear tendency to regard us as
parts of nature and to think, especially about language
is natural. So if we think about the evolution
of our bodies, and we think about how our
our The organism evolved to be capable of these
complex forms of life that we are capable of.
That's very interesting and and cognitive or excuse me,
evolutionary psychology, evolutionary theory generally might have a lot
to say about that that's really helpful, really very,
very interesting, um. I, I think, for example, evolutionary
psychology. I can help us understand quite a bit
about how How it is that people are so
difficult. To understand why it is that humans deceive
each other, hide things from each other, have to
interpret each other. The the fact that we evolved
to compete more with other human beings, more with,
I mean, going all the way back in hominid
evolution, hominids had to compete with other hominids, more
than they had to compete at work. Navigate the
environment, most likely the strongest factor influencing whether or
not you could reproduce, was your ability to compete
with and cooperate with other human beings. So those
tensions of competition and cooperation with other human beings,
I think that's a very deep part of what
it is to be human. And I think that
it's reflected in Wittgenstein's philosophy when he's trying to
work out the incredible complexity of reading each other
and playing what he calls the language games and
participating in the forms of life that are social,
and the intricacies of those games. So I think
there's a lot of work to be done. Where
we can look at how those two fields overlap,
but it does require thinking about how we evolved
to do what we do rather than thinking about
the evolution of a private mental mechanism.
And still on the topic of evolutionary approaches to
religion or to the cognitive science of religion. Uh,
uh, I, I, I know, I'm well aware of
this because I've talked about this topic on the
show with several different cognitive scientists of religion, but
one of the most debated topics there has to
do with whether, um, religion is the result of
evolved mental fact. Faculties evolved adaptations or if it
is the byproduct of other evolved adaptations of adaptations
of the mind that evolved for other purposes. So,
um, would, do you think that a Wittgensteinian approach
would have anything to say specifically about this topic?
No, I mean, be very, very careful that the
What evolved, what evolved in human beings are brains,
so to speak, not. Not mental mechanisms, there's nothing
inside a human being that traffics in ideas or
images in the ways that psychologists too often fall
into the trap of imagining them. What's going on
inside the brain is physical, physiological, neurological. And to
the extent that we can really talk about those
things and talk about how people evolved to do
the things that they do. We might have a
really interesting discussion, but the cognitive science of religion
that I've read, and I think cognitive science generally
is all about trying to name. Hidden mental mechanisms
that they, the psychologists always say, well, this must
be in the brain, but they're not usually talking
about the brain very much at all. They're guessing
about the brain. They're guessing that the brain has
a mechanism that makes us feel. Disgusted by corpses
or Perceptive of movement or things like that, and
they know very, very little about how the brains
lead to those kinds of behavior, and they start
inventing a mechanism that supposedly produces images and words
or ideas or emotions. Those are, those are all
things that are descriptive at the level of human
life. Those are not descriptive of brain processes. If
you want to talk about brains. A good starting
point is to be literal. And if you want
to talk about life, talk about life, and I
think Far too often, and that debate about that
you brought up cognitive science or religion, far too
often what's happening is people are are inventing these
mechanisms. They're saying, well somehow it's in the brain,
but they don't have much of an idea of
how it is. So the question, did mental mechanisms
evolve? To produce religious beliefs primarily, or was it
a uh an accidental byproduct. I think that debate
is largely a confusion from the outset because it's,
it's all about these. Mechanisms that don't exist anywhere.
They're Their imaginary mechanisms that misunderstand the grammar of
language, the grammar of psychological language. They're they're confusing
a grammatical domain of life, or a metaphysical domain
of life, a hidden mental mechanism that isn't there.
They are hidden brain mechanisms, but Not mental in
the way that they're used in this discussion. I
don't know if that's clear enough. It's a, it's
a very hard point to explain. Uh,
NO, yeah, it is, and let me just ask
you a follow up to that then. Do you
think that in disagreeing with uh cognitive scientists of
religion who Have evolutionary approaches to it, uh, do
you think that Wittgenstein would also be interested in
pointing perhaps to how, um, they are conditioned, conditioned,
I, I mean, I'm not, I'm not sure if
conditioned in this particular context is the best word
to use, but conditioned. In their, in the way
they think about religion uh by their own uh
frame, by their own intellectual framework, the framework that
they bring into analyzing religion here.
Yes, absolutely. I think this is very important. So
when the cognitive scientists of religion, the, the works
that I've read. Quite consistently approached this from the
idea that That Each private mind constructs a theory
of the external world, and there are religious theories
of the world, and there are scientific theories of
the world, and they bring with them the attitude
that the scientific theory of the world is superior,
and then they they weave that sense of superiority
into theories, and it's easy to weave them in
because the the theories are In effect, They're they're
made up. They, they claim that it's based on
the evolution of the human body, but it's the
evidence isn't there, that you have to look at
how bodies evolved to understand how bodies evolved.
Uh, BUT one of the, of the things that
the cognitive scientists of religion do through science, of
course, is that they try to naturalize religion. They
think of religion as a natural phenomenon. Do you
think that at least that Wittgenstein would tend to
agree with, I mean, with the process of naturalizing
religion, even if not through the same sort of
theoretical framework.
Yes, um, so, It it it's a complicated answer
again, but the There is a way, I mean,
Vickenstein is most certainly saying that. Human beings are
a kind of animal, and all of our capacities
and all of our ways of life. ARE part
of these animal capacities. They're they're built on top
of them. So it's perfectly legitimate to say that
our religious ways of life are built on top
of animal capacities that evolved or, you know, millions,
hundreds of millions of years. And in that sense,
there there's a lot to be said about. How
they, how religions can be understood naturalistically, how they
can be understood as something animal. What's not to
be done here, what what the naturalizing of Wittgenstein
doesn't lead to is a naturalistic theory of the
internal mental mechanism. That is specifically the mistake that
happens over and over and over and over. That's
why I keep saying it. That's the big mistake
and it causes enormous trouble in philosophy and in
psychology.
So, um, as a last question, I would like
to quote you here. This comes from, I think,
one of your papers on Wittgensteinian approaches to religion,
and I would like to hear your, uh, comments
or explanation of it. So. You say real understanding
of religious beliefs mainly comes out of perspicuous representations
of religious phenomena, not instrumental accounts of their underlying
causes. So could you explain that uh quote?
Sure, um, I mean, first, the, the phrase perspicuous
representation is is Wittgenstein's own, and it's a very
important idea in Wittgenstein's later philosophy, um. What he
was trying to say is that When we see
things from a a certain angle when we make
different connections between the facts of the world that
we're trying to understand, those connections themselves are a
form of understanding. Seeing things in the relationship with
each other is that does count as understanding. Things
become significant to us and make sense to us,
and that we should. Respect that there are certain
domains of life where that kind of understanding is
really the more useful kind, rather than a a
causal explanation. And I think that's often true in
religion. So when I said earlier that understanding religious
phenomena often comes down to doing your best to
imagine your way into the life of a believer.
What do things mean to that person? Why are
they inspired to make a gesture when they do,
to pray when they do, to say the things
they do, um, or if you're looking at really
exotic rituals to cannibalize when they do. What's it
to to understand those things is to see from
that person's point of view, and that would be.
To develop a perspicuous representation that describes what things
look like from the believer's perspective. Things come into
view where you, you see the relationships between things
from their perspective, and that provides a really deep
kind of understanding.
Mhm. Uh, BY the way, let me just ask
you one more question then. When it comes to
the cognitive science of religion and your more Wittgensteinian
approach to religion, do you think that there would
be any room here for Wittgensteinians and the cognitive
scientists or Religion to collaborate with one another in
studying religion, there would be room for, uh, both,
uh, for the, uh, the two approaches to complement
each other or even to perhaps have a pluralistic
approach to religion here? Or do you see them
as, I don't know, if one is the dominant,
then it just excludes the other. There's no room
for Collaboration here at all, uh, intellectually speaking.
No, I, I, I think that there is some
room for collaboration. There's, as I tried to explain,
I feel like I wasn't as clear as I
would like to be on a couple of points,
but. There is real room to think about. Wittgenstein's
insights and evolutionary psychology. OK. Cognitive science of religion.
I think it would be difficult given what cognitive
science, how it's understood currently. I think it would
be difficult to make that relationship work. However, if
the cognitive scientists were to start to approach Understanding
the nature of psychological language from a point of
view. Then they might put themselves in a position
to really start doing science and the kinds of
experiments that they sometimes run. The experiments sometimes turn
up things that are interesting. And it would be
a question of interpreting those experiments in a different
light, and I think that could be done, and
I think that could be very interesting and productive,
but it would, to agree with what Wienstein is
saying, would generally speaking require a pretty radical reorientation
in how to interpret research and results, and yeah,
I, I think it would be, it would be
difficult but possible with that.
So do you think that it would also imply
more broadly a different approach to science or not
necessarily?
All of science? Like,
yeah, I mean, basically to the scient of course,
I know that this is more of a uh
philosophical question within the philosophy of science and it's
multi-layered and multifaceted, but uh um basically the way
we approach the scientific method in general.
Oh, No, the, the Science is is Is doing
just fine. Um, AND Wittgenstein is definitely not saying
anything that I think would require that. I think
what what Wittgenstein is is saying about science is
that it's one method of understanding, and we might
say it should be respected and kept in its
in its channel. And at the same time, we
have many other ways of understanding the world that
are equally valid and important for human beings, and
sometimes they're more appropriate for a given topic. And
a lot of the things we've been talking about
are those topics. There, there are aspects of psychology,
of understanding human beings, understanding ourselves that are better
approached with other methods and religion. There are, there
are topics in religion that are better approached with
other methods, um. They overlap with science. Wienstein is
not dogmatic in this way. Science has It's always
valid. In its in its proper places. So there
could be corners of religion, lots and lots of
things about psychology where science is perfect. It's exactly
what you need and you want to do it.
And of course science is broad. Science covers lots
and lots of things.
Great. So, uh, just before we go, would you
like to tell people where they can find you
and your work on the internet?
Sure, uh, well, I'm, I'm in the process of
uh revising my the web page on my Western
Carolina University account, but I think the best place
to go as soon as I have all that
updated would be Western Carolina University. I they can
search for my name and find my work there.
Great. So, Doctor Hoyt, uh thank you so much
again for taking the time to come on the
show. It's been a real pleasure to talk with
you.
Thank you, Ricardo. I really appreciate it.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Matri Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes called Holbrookfield governor
Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnseroro and Hal
Herzognun Macha Joan La Jasent and the Samuel Corriere,
Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus Fran David
Sloan Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londono Correa.
Yannick Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynaleb medicine,
Gary Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon
Scorteus Slelisky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John
Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai
Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the
Augusta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, Old
Heringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy Zigoren,
Jeff McMahon, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas
Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert,
Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George
Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert,
Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner,
Ursulauddinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levine,
and Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers.
These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden,
Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick
Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio
Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.